---
categories:
- chapter-1
- design-theory
- elearning
- phd
- thesis
- webfuse
date: 2010-08-12 12:12:17+10:00
next:
  text: Situated/distributed cognition and e-learning
  url: /blog/2010/08/13/situateddistributed-cognition-and-e-learning/
previous:
  text: The McNamara Fallacy and pass rates, academic analytics, and engagement
  url: /blog/2010/08/09/the-mcnamara-fallacy-and-pass-rates-academic-analytics-and-engagement/
title: Background to the thesis
type: post
template: blog-post.html
---
It seems like I'm in the downhill stretch with the [thesis](/blog/research/phd-thesis/). Almost all the new material has been written, am just waiting on some feedback from my esteemed supervisor before completing the last new section (it follows the same structure as a previous section, hence the importance of feedback). So, while I'm waiting on that feedback, I'm starting the revision of the draft chapters. The following is a re-working of the first main section of chapter 1 and provides the background to the research.

### Background to the research

Advanced industrial societies are currently undergoing a fundamental transformation from capital- and labour-based economies into knowledge economies (Burton-Jones 2001). In such economies knowledge, education, people and their ideas, become the key strategic resource necessary for prosperity (Duderstadt, Atkins et al. 2002). This transition to a knowledge economy is characterised by factors including globalization, increasing competition, knowledge sharing and transfer, and an information technology revolution (Zhang and Nunamaker 2003). This transition raises a number of issues for education systems, in particular how best to adapt such systems to the changes in the socio-economic landscape and provide the best educational opportunities and outcomes (Knight, Knight et al. 2006).

Schools and universities will play increasingly important roles as society enters this new age of knowledge as society becomes increasingly dependent upon the social institutions that create knowledge and educate people (Duderstadt, Atkins et al. 2002). Some believe that the university will be the central institution in post-industrial society (Bok 1990). A 2002 survey of 30 OECD countries indicated that more people than ever are completing tertiary education and that 1.9% of the combined GDP of these countries was devoted to higher education (OECD 2005). A report comparing education between the G8 countries show those countries spending between 1% and 2.7% of GDP on higher education during the year 2000 (Sen, Partelow et al. 2005).

Universities, however, are one of a very few institutions that have maintained their existence since the 1500s (Kerr 1994). The pre-dominant model of the University is still the traditional combination of teaching and academic research suggested by Wilhelm von Humboldt in the 19th century (Tsichritzis 1999). These observations are often attributed to the ability of universities to be resistant to change (Green and Hayward 1997). The nature of e-learning, to some extent, conflicts with the academic culture based on autonomy and a reward system based on research (OECD 2005). Yet, the growth of e-learning has been incremental and has not fundamentally challenged the face-to-face classroom (OECD 2005).

The emergence of the knowledge economy and the increasing influence of technology are not the only factors driving change within higher education. Indeed the last 30 years has seen a period of unprecedented change as higher education institutions across the world as they are being shaped by similar problems and forces (Green and Hayward 1997). These forces include: increased access and growth in participation, reduction in public funding, increased costs, increased calls for accountability in outcomes and subsequent arguments around autonomy, the changing nature and growth of knowledge and disciplines, industrialisation and industrial relations policy, and internationalisation (Green and Hayward 1997; Coaldrake and Stedman 1999; Cunningham, Ryan et al. 2000). The uncertainty about the future generated by these changes highlights the importance of building institutions that are responsive to change. (CRHEFP 1997). It is the institutions that are able to continually adapt to these changes that will be successful (Huynh, Umesh et al. 2003) and survive (Klor de Alva 2000).

The increasing importance and impact of information and communication technologies (ICTS) is seen as one of the major drivers for this need for adaptability. Zhang et al (2004) observe that the knowledge economy shows a pervasive and ever-increasing demand for innovative delivery of education, which has led to dramatic changes in learning technology and organizations The new technological possibilities and the new learning environments they enable are contributing to an unavoidable pressure for change (Tsichritzis 1999). The advancement of computer and networking technologies are providing a diverse means to support learning in a more personalised, flexible, portable and on-demand manner (Zhang, Zhao et al. 2004). These new technologies have become a major force for change in higher education institutions that will potentially have a profound effect on the structure of higher education (Green and Hayward 1997). Some suggest that the rapidly evolving technology and emerging competition puts the very survival of the current form of the university at risk (Duderstadt, Atkins et al. 2002). For example, Peter Drucker suggests, "Thirty years from now the big university campuses will be relics. Universities won't survive. It is as large a change as when we first got the printed book" (Lenzer and Johnson 1997). Unlike previous periods of technology-driven social change the impact of information technology affects the basic activities of a university: creating, preserving, integrating, transmitting and applying knowledge, and more fundamentally changing the relationship between people and knowledge (Duderstadt, Atkins et al. 2002).

The use of ICTs in learning has a history going back at least 30 years and has been characterized by a variety of names including: computer-mediated communication (CMC), computer conferencing, computer-based training (CBT), computer-aided learning (CAL), computer-managed learning (CML), distributed learning, electronically enabled learning, online learning, web-based education, Internet-based learning, telematics and e-learning (McCormack and Jones 1997). The use of different terminologies and often different definitions for the same term makes it difficult to develop a generic definition (Ally 2004). This thesis adopts the definition provided by the OECD (2005) where e-learning is defined as "the use of information and communications technology to enhance and/or support learning in tertiary education". In this definition, e-learning is expanded to include support for any and all tasks required to encourage and support efficient and effective teaching and learning (Jones and Gregor 2004).

The importance of e-learning in contemporary universities cannot be denied (deFreitas and Oliver 2005). Allen and Seaman (2004) report on estimates that by October, 2004 over 2.6 million students will be studying online courses at US-based universities and that over 50% of institutions agree that online education is critical to their long-term strategy. The questions about e-learning have moved from a focus on use versus non-use to how, why and with what outcomes (Hitt and Hartman 2002).

Most universities are currently answering the "how to implement e-learning" question through the adoption of a Learning Management System (LMS). These systems are also known as Course Management Systems (CMS) and Virtual Learning Environments (VLE). Learning Management Systems (LMSs) are software systems that are specifically designed and marketed to educational institutions to support teaching and learning and that generally provide tools for communication, student assessment, presentation of study material and organisation of student activities (Luck, Jones et al. 2004). There is, however, evidence to suggest that this strategy is not particularly innovative, is limited in quality and ability to integrate with other systems (Alexander 2001; Paulsen 2002). Even the most advanced institutions report little more than 50% adoption by faculty (Sausner 2005). With some exceptions universities have not employed technology to the same degree or as effectively as the business community (Piccoli, Ahmad et al. 2000). Successful implementation of LMSs in an academic environment is rather rare (Sarker and Nicholson 2005). Early adoption of e-learning by Australian universities during the 1990s was done without critical examination of the merits and led to cases of wasted resources, unfulfilled expectations, and program and organizational failure (Pratt 2005). There is considerable evidence that e-learning within universities struggles to engage a significant percentage of students and staff, and has limited success in moving development beyond projects by innovators (Salmon 2005). Van der Klink and Hochems (2004) suggest that high-level ambitions with poor implementation is the best description for most institutions in terms of e-learning implementation.

It is not all that surprising that difficulties exist in the implementation of e-learning within universities. The application of information technology within universities is highly complex, confusing and raises issues that are almost over-whelming in nature (Duderstadt, Atkins et al. 2002). E-learning remains a novel and immature activity (OECD 2005). The transformation promised, or threatened, by e-learning is in reality a very fundamental transformation process, driven by technology but involving people, organizations, and cultures that must be addressed both systemically and ecologically (Duderstadt, Atkins et al. 2002). Scholars in Information Systems can offer vision on structures and processes to effectively implement technology-mediated learning initiatives (Alavi and Leidner 2001). Keller (2005) agrees that perspectives from information systems research and organisation theory can help better understand the implementation of e-learning. Salmon (2005) has called for more research to develop theories, principles, and methodologies of change related to the sustainability of e-learning within universities.

### References

Alavi, M. and D. E. Leidner (2001). "Research commentary: technology-mediated learning - a call for greater depth and breadth of research." Information Systems Research **12**(1): 1-10.

Alexander, S. (2001). "E-learning developments and experiences." Education and Training **43**(4/5): 240-248.

Allen, I. E. and J. Seaman (2004). Entering the mainstream: The quality and extent of online education in the United States, 2003 and 2004. Needham, MA, The Sloan Consortium.

Ally, M. (2004). Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning. Theory and Practice of Online Learning. T. Anderson and F. Elloumi. Athabasca, Canada, Athabasca University**:** 3-31.

Bok, D. (1990). Universities and the Future of America. Durham, North Carolina, USA, Duke University Press.

Burton-Jones, A. (2001). Knowledge Capitalism: Business, Work and Learning in the New Economy. Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Coaldrake, P. and L. Stedman (1999). Academic Work in the Twenty-first Century: Changing roles and policies. Canberra, Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs**:** 38.

CRHEFP (1997). Learning for Life: Review of Higher Education Financing and Policy. Canberra, Committee of Review of Higher Education Financing and Policy, Australian Government Printing Services.

Cunningham, S., Y. Ryan, et al. (2000). The Business of Borderless Education. Canberra, Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs**:** 328.

deFreitas, S. and M. Oliver (2005). "Does e-learning policy drive change in higher education? A case study relating models of organisational change to e-learning implementation." Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management **27**(1): 81-95.

Duderstadt, J., D. Atkins, et al. (2002). Higher education in the digital age: Technology issues and strategies for American colleges and universities. Westport, Conn, Praeger Publishers.

Green, M. and F. Hayward (1997). Forces for Change. Transforming Higher Education: Views from Leaders Around the World. M. Green. Phoenix, Arizona, The Oryx Press**:** 3-26.

Hitt, J. and J. Hartman (2002). Distributed learning: New challenges and opportunities for institutional leadership. Washington, American Council on Education**:** 28.

Huynh, M., U. N. Umesh, et al. (2003). "E-Learning as an emerging entrepreneurial enterprise in universities and firms." Communications of the AIS **12**: 48-68.

Jones, D. and S. Gregor (2004). An information systems design theory for e-learning. Managing New Wave Information Systems: Enterprise, Government and Society, Proceedings of the 15th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, Hobart, Tasmania.

Keller, C. (2005). "Virtual learning environments: three implementation perspectives." Learning, Media and Technology **30**(3): 299-311.

Kerr, C. (1994). Higher Education Cannot Escape History. New York, SUNY Press.

Klor de Alva, J. (2000). "Remaking the Academy - 21st Century Challenges to Higher Education in the Age of Information." EDUCAUSE Review: 32-40.

Knight, C., B. A. Knight, et al. (2006). Releasing the pedagogical power of information and communication technology for learners: A case study. International Journal of Education and Development using ICT. **2**.

Lenzer, R. and S. Johnson (1997). Seeing Things as They Really Are. Forbes.

Luck, J., D. Jones, et al. (2004). "Challenging Enterprises and Subcultures: Interrogating 'Best Practice' in Central Queensland University's Course Management Systems." Best practice in university learning and teaching: Learning from our Challenges.  Theme issue of Studies in Learning, Evaluation, Innovation and Development **1**(2): 19-31.

McCormack, C. and D. Jones (1997). Building a Web-Based Education System. New York, John Wiley & Sons.

OECD (2005). E-Learning in Tertiary Education: Where do we stand? Paris, France, Centre for Educational Research and Innovation, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

OECD (2005). Education at a glance: OECD indicators 2005. Paris, OECD.

OECD. (2005, 17 January 2006). "Policy Brief: E-learning in Tertiary Education."   Retrieved 5 December, 2006, from [http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/55/25/35961132.pdf](http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/55/25/35961132.pdf).

Paulsen, M. F. (2002). "Online education systems in Scandinavian and Australian Universities: A Comparative Study." International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning.

Piccoli, G., R. Ahmad, et al. (2000). "Knowledge management in academia: A proposed framework." Information Technology and Management **1**: 229-245.

Pratt, J. (2005). "The Fashionable Adoption of Online Learning Technologies in Australian Universities." Journal of the Australian and New Zealand Academy of Management **11**(1): 57-73.

Salmon, G. (2005). "Flying not flapping: a strategic framework for e-learning and pedagogical innovation in higher education institutions." ALT-J, Research in Learning Technology **13**(3): 201-218.

Sarker, S. and J. Nicholson (2005). "Exploring the Myths about Online Education in Information Systems." Informing Science **8**: 55-73.

Sausner, R. (2005). Course management: Ready for prime time? University Business.

Sen, A., L. Partelow, et al. (2005). Comparative Indicators of Education in the United States and Other G8 Countries: 2004. Washington, DC, U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. **2006:** 95.

Tsichritzis, D. (1999). "Reengineering the University." Communications of the ACM **42**(6): 93-100.

Van der Klink, M. and W. Jochems (2004). Management and organization of integrated e-learning. Integrated e-learning: Implications for pedagogy, technology and organization. W. Jochems, J. Van Merrienboer and R. Koper. London, RoutledgeFalmer**:** 151-163.

Zhang, D. and J. Nunamaker (2003). "Power e-learning in the new millennium: An overview of e-learning and enabling technology." Information Systems Frontiers **5**(2): 207-218.

Zhang, D., J. L. Zhao, et al. (2004). "Can e-learning replace classroom learning?" Communications of the ACM **47**(5): 75-79.