---
title: "Made with 'Some assemblage'"
type: note
---

See also: [[about]]

It's fairly common to see websites and other digital artefacts badged with simple "Made with X" statements. This site's initial template came with the statement: "Made with Material for MkDocs". The idea that any sizeable website is made with a single tool woefully undersells what is required and significantly oversells the enabling power of that single tool. Not surprisingly, such statements are more marketing than reality.

The replacement of this statement is intended to:

1. Better capture the assemblage of tools and practices that are "made" this site; and,
2. Illustrate the "Some assemblage required" tag line for this blog.

!!! note "Under construction 🚧"

    Initially this page is a placeholder textual description of the assemblage. Eventually, perhaps, it will be littered with more visual representations.

## Technologies

The technologies that make up the assemblage, include:

- [Foam](https://foambubble.github.io/foam/) 

    I use Foam to write and manage the content of this blog as a collection of Markdown files. Foam is a personal knowledge management and sharing system inspired by Roam. Foam itself is constructed through an assemblage of VS-Code, various VS-code extensions, and git. 

- [Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/)

    Material for MkDocs or more correctly the assemblage of technologies that includes Material for MkDocs transforms the Markdown files authored using Foam into the website you see before you. This assemblage starts with the open source `mkdocs` static site generator (SSG) which another open source project assembles into Material for MkDocs. Both use the Python language, Jinja templates, and other open source technologies which help me make further configurations (blog specific templates) and assemblages (Python code that implements specific functionality).

- `blogTidyup.py`

    A Python script that I wrote to convert the content of this site from before 2025 from Wordpress to Markdown. That script assembles together numerous other Python modules and utilities to achieve this conversion.



[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[about]: about.md "About this blog - and its limitations"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"
